---
layout: post
title: "Life in the slow lane"
categories: etc
---

### or, how we stopped using fastlane for continuous integration

I [previously wrote][fast] about how to set up continuous integration for an iOS
app with fastlane and Jenkins. I have since changed my mind about that approach.

## Why we used fastlane

When I was initially tasked with setting up CI for our team, I used fastlane
because

1. Senior developers said "I heard about this thing called fastlane that can
   automate iOS deployment. You should use that."
2. and when I looked up fastlane it had a large community around it

To be fair, fastlane did work. For about a year, on every push it would build
our app, run our tests, and report back to git if the branch was OK to merge.
This brought huge improvements to our development process because previously we
were basically relying on due diligence and the honor system to make sure that
tests got run.

## What sucks about fastlane

1. Xcode sucks
2. It's a huge dependency
3. It's buggy
4. Everyone uses it
5. It's an additional layer of complexity
6. It has way ðŸ‘ too ðŸ’¯ many ðŸ˜‚ emoji ðŸš€

Let's dive into each of these a bit.

### Xcode sucks

fastlane advertises itself as making your life as an iOS developer so much
easier. Perhaps in certain areas that is true, but for a lot of what we were
using fastlane for it was ultimately just wrapping commands to Xcode. And here's
the problem: Xcode _really_ really sucks. A lot. I hate it.

Ever since the release of Xcode 10, some frameworks in our app sometimes have
build cycles reported _inside them_. Somehow Xcode thinks that linking the files
in a framework can require the framework itself to already be built? I have a
[500 point bounty][bounty] on Stackoverflow about this. Let's not get into that. The point
is that sometimes, seemingly randomly, Xcode will decide it won't build our app
anymore. That means the Jenkins build fails, which means no tests run, which
means no merge.

[bounty]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/52724480/xcode-10-framework-dependency-cycle-with-itself

Or sometimes the build succeeds and Xcode won't run the tests. Why? "Early
unexpected exit," it says. "No restart will be attempted," even though
restarting the tests is _literally the **only fix for this error**_. So again,
no tests, no merge, seemingly at random.

fastlane doesn't help with this. And I don't expect it to, because fastlane is
built on the insane assumption that Xcode will always work. So this isn't a mark
against fastlane, but for us it made me start to question why we used this tool
if it was doing nothing to address the two main pain points for our continuous
integration setup. Especially considering that fastlane is a

### Huge dependency

When you finally get fastlane running and look at your cute little `Fastfile`,
you'll feel giddy:

{% highlight ruby %}
platform :ios do
  before_all do
    setup_jenkins
  end

  lane :test do
    run_tests scheme: 'Tests', device: 'iPhone 6'
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

So simple! So clean! Just don't look at your `Gemfile.lock`

{% highlight bash %}
$ bundle install
# Bundle complete! 2 Gemfile dependencies, 67 gems now installed.
{% endhighlight %}

That simplicity doesn't come cheap. And since we want to keep our Jenkins
workspaces clean, that's 67 dependencies to install on the build machine for
_every push_.

And it's not just big in terms of _build_ dependencies. fastlane does a lot at
runtime that I don't care about. For example, every one of our builds gets tons
of messages like this:

{% highlight bash %}
$ xcodebuild -showBuildSettings -scheme LoggingSharedFrameworkTests -project ./MyApp.xcodeproj
# Command timed out after 3 seconds on try 1 of 4, trying again with a 6 second timeout...
{% endhighlight %}

Sometimes it takes three or four of these timeouts (with increasing durations)
before it succeeds. Why run this at all? And when you look at the build command
it ends up running...

{% highlight bash %}
$ set -o pipefail && env NSUnbufferedIO=YES xcodebuild -scheme LoggingSharedFrameworkTests -project ./MyApp.xcodeproj -destination 'platform=iOS Simulator,id=4EE01278-1CB2-4723-B24E-B9B5C0CF4983' -derivedDataPath '/Users/jenkins/.agent/workspace/p-66UA6AA2W6/derivedData' -resultBundlePath '/Users/jenkins/.agent/workspace/p-66UA6AA2W6/output/LoggingSharedFrameworkTests.test_result' build test | tee '/Users/jenkins/Library/Logs/scan/LoggingSharedFrameworkTests-LoggingSharedFrameworkTests.log' | xcpretty  --report junit --output '/Users/jenkins/.agent/workspace/p-66UA6AA2W6/output/LoggingSharedFrameworkTests.junit' --report junit --output '/var/folders/4c/fw71hw555x99lkr_vt1c5krw0000gq/T/junit_report20180803-11540-1ntdx6t'
{% endhighlight %}

Yeah. Seeing this stuff makes me nervous, because I worry that fastlane is doing
a bunch of extra work that

* at best, I don't care about or
* at worst, is going to cause problems that I have to fix (don't laugh, read
  on...)

### Fastlane bugs

I now know that fastlane is buggy, especially in the realm of generating test
reports. There are two main ways to do this with fastlane and both of them are
bad.

1. `xcpretty`, the default. This tries to generate test results by parsing
   Xcode's output while it runs tests. If you've ever written a tool that tries
   to parse another piece of software's logs, you know how insane and fragile
   this is. Unsurprisingly, this results in errors like success/fail being mixed
   up or large numbers of tests being missed entirely.
2. `trainer`, a fastlane plugin. This does the sane thing of actually reading
   the Xcode test report. But while working on it I found two bugs that made it
   unsuitable for use on Jenkins (it doesn't handle Jenkins workspaces well, and
   you end up with weird test durations and test suites when Jenkins parses the
   report).

All software has bugs, I don't blame fastlane for this. But what makes it awful
is that

### Everyone uses fastlane

Have you ever needed to go to a government office to get some bureacratic
paperwork processed? Or have you ever needed to go to your cable company's
office in person to exchange some hardware or resolve a billing dispute?

These are universally awful experiences and I theorize that they are both awful
for these two reasons:

1. They have to serve a wide audience with a broad range of needs and
   capabilities
2. The people being served are only there out of necessity and would much rather
   be doing something else

These translate into awfulness because the employees need to treat every
customer like they have the same lowest possible baseline of intelligence. It
doesn't matter if you're a professional network engineer, the cable company is
going to make sure you restart your computer and check the internet again before
they replace your cable modem that is literally on fire. And the employees
aren't entirely at fault because the people are desperate to get out of there,
meaning they are liable to misrepresent facts, misreport problems, and often
expect the employees to magically fix things that are completely out of their
control.

fastlane's bug tracker is exactly this situation.

Because it's advertised as a time-saving miracle tool, lots of people use it.
Because it tries to do all things iOS, people use it for a broad set of
unrelated tasks. And people only show up in the bug tracker because all of a
sudden they're losing money and the only thing they know is that they're running
a fastlane command and getting an error message.

So getting a fastlane bug addressed is like waiting in line in the customer
service department of your nightmares. If they listen to you at all it's going
to take a long time, and even longer for them to actually fix anything.

### Additional complexity

Because I never witnessed a bug report being addressed by fastlane developers, I
ended up doing a lot of build debugging myself. Here's the problem: Xcode is a
really complicated tool and fastlane is a really complicated tool and fastlane
needs to run Xcode to do almost anything. Surprisingly, it's way harder to debug
fastlane than it is to debug Xcode! It took me longer than I'd like to admit to
realize this.

Once I finally stopped relying entirely on fastlane and started running Xcode
commands directly, it became much easier to realize which problems were coming
from where.

But while the Xcode problems were easy to debug because I could ignore the
complexity of fastlane, I still would have to figure out how to make my solution
work in fastlane. Like restarting tests if they fail for a very particular,
mysterious reason; it wasn't obvious how to do that in fastlane even though I
knew exactly where that error appeared and in what Xcode command. And the
fastlane problems were essentially unfixable as discussed in the previous
section.

Again, I kept coming to the question, "Why am I even using this tool?"

### Emoji

Unrelated, but it seems like fastlane is kind of obsessed with them. I don't get
it. It's weird right?

## Replacing fastlane

So we ditched fastlane. What now? I replaced it with four scripts. If you read
my [Jenkins post][fast], the three bash scripts directly match the three steps
in our Jenkins pipeline.

### prepare build

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/bash
bundle install
carthage bootstrap --platform iOS --cache-builds
{% endhighlight %}

The simplest, sets up dependencies since Jenkins always starts with a clean
workspace. The only gem we need is `xcpretty`, which has only one other
dependency.

### build tests

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/bash

set -xo pipefail

DATADIR=derivedData
DERIVED_DATA=(-derivedDataPath "$DATADIR")

build() {
    xcodebuild -scheme Tests -project ./MyApp.xcodeproj -destination 'platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 6' ${DERIVED_DATA[@]} build-for-testing | tee buildlog | bundle exec xcpretty --color
    RESULT=$?
    return $RESULT
}

if ! build && grep 'error: Cycle' buildlog; then
    rm -rf "$DATADIR"
    build
fi

exit $RESULT
{% endhighlight %}

Pretty self-explanatory. I only use that `DERIVED_DATA` variable so that it's
easy to comment out in case I want to run with the default path. And note that I
still use `xcpretty`. It sucks at test reports, but it does make the log easier
to read.

And lastly, look at that simple fix for random cycle errors. We first try an
incremental build (if the workspace wasn't clean). If we see that error, clean
it and start again. If it _still_ fails, the cycle is probably legitimate.

### test

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/bash

set -xo pipefail

DATADIR=derivedData
OUTDIR=output
DERIVED_DATA=(-derivedDataPath "$DATADIR")
OUTPUT=(-resultBundlePath "$OUTDIR")

test() {
    rm -rf "$OUTDIR"
    xcodebuild -scheme Tests -project ./MyApp.xcodeproj -destination 'platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 6' ${DERIVED_DATA[@]} ${OUTPUT[@]} test-without-building | bundle exec xcpretty --color
    RESULT=$?
}

for run in {1..5}; do
    test

    ! grep --max-count=1 'Early unexpected exit, operation never finished bootstrapping' "$OUTDIR"/TestSummaries.plist && break
done

./scripts/plist2junit.rb "$OUTDIR"/TestSummaries.plist > "$OUTDIR"/report.junit

exit $RESULT
{% endhighlight %}

Slightly more complicated. Sometimes Xcode _really_ doesn't want to start those
tests, so this loops 5 times, only exiting the loop if the results did not show
that random failure to start.

### plist2junit

I was _very_ hesitant to make this script for generating test reports. Perhaps the
"proper" way to do this would be to use extensible stylesheet language
transformations (XSLT) to transform Xcode's test report plist (which is XML)
into the JUnit report (which is slightly reorganized XML). But, first of all, I
didn't even know XSLT was a _thing_ before finding this [blog post][xslt] about it
when researching this exact issue. Secondly, XSLT seems to be some ancient lost
art that would involve buying and reading a book from the 90s before I can even
start hacking on it (seriously, bravo to XML; you have further secured your
position as the most over-engineered language). Third, I love me some Ruby.

[xslt]: https://warchimede.github.io/2017/07/16/convert-xcode-plist-test-reports-to-junit-xml/

So I won't paste this here because it's a bit more beefy, though still less than
100 lines of Ruby. It's on my [github][plist]. Check the readme for the benefits
of using it.

[plist]: https://github.com/silverhammermba/plist2junit

## Results

First, most importantly, our continuous integration reliability has shot through
the roof. Previously I felt like I had to babysit it every day, constantly
diagnosing whether build or test failures were legitimate. Consequently the rest
of my team never trusted it.

Hopefully, from now on, errors should be actual errors that developers need to
address in their code.

Secondly, I feel much more in control of our build process. Yes, less code is
better code, and I did have to write more code to get rid of fastlane. But that
increase in code size is utterly dwarfed by the 67 dependencies we were able to
eliminate, even ignoring the increased reliability of the process. If something
goes wrong, there are very few places I have to look.

This build process is easy to test, since you can just run the separate scripts
yourself, or even copy-paste their commands directly into your terminal. I don't
need fastlane's entire environment present to support the simple build commands
I need.

## fastlane doesn't suck

But fastlane isn't useless! I'm only critical of it in the realm of continuous
integration where, as I explained, I think its meager benefits do not outweigh
its costs.

But it has tons of other functionality, for example automated screenshots and
automated deployments, that I wouldn't dare replace with hacked-together shell
scripts. We still have a Fastfile sitting around in our repo, we just don't use
it as often anymore.

[fast]: {{ site.baseurl }}/{% post_url 2018-08-13-osx-jenkins %}
