---
layout: post
title: "COVID-19: Day 1"
date: 2020-10-06
categories: etc
---

My wife and I were stupid and went to a large indoor gathering over the weekend.
We wore masks... kinda, we tried to social distance... kinda. Now we both feel
sick. We haven't been tested for COVID-19 yet, so maybe this is just a regular
cold or flu or allergies, but I doubt it. I want to keep a little diary of what
it's been like for us.

## Early signs ##

We attended the event Saturday afternoon/evening. We didn't notice anyone with
symptoms at the event. We both felt fine for a couple days afterwards. On Monday
night we both felt a little off. Our throats were a little scratchy, I had a
mild headache. This is spot-on for the two-day delay often associated with
COVID-19.

## The first full day ##

In the morning I still had the headache and it was worse. She had a runny nose.
We decided to cancel all upcoming outside appointments and quarantine for the
next 10 days. That means we'll be free on October 16.

We both worked full days from home. She said she felt mostly fine, just had a
little cough. My headache persisted throughout the day. I felt a little foggy
and it was hard to focus on work. I drank several liters of water but my throat
still feels worse now and I also have a small cough. I feel a bit tired.

Still, nothing worse than mild flu symptoms at this time. We're both very
nervous, however. It's hard not to think about death at least a little bit,
though there's also nothing we can do other than wait and see.
