---
layout: post
title: "The Clean Trap"
date: 2021-06-12
categories: etc
---

I just read Clean Architecture by Robert C. Martin. In general, the book
contains a lot of great advice about software architecture. However, it also
contains a rather large trap, which you should be wary of.

## Laying the trap

Like I said, the advice in the book is solid (sorry for the pun). The problem is
that it is worded in a way that sounds very absolute. The advice is given not as
guidelines but as "principles". You don't want to violate principles! The
architecture which is developed over the course of the book is "_The_ Clean
Architecture". Not _an_ architecture&mdash;no&mdash;it is the one and only clean
architecture. What, are you going to risk using one of those other _dirty_
architectures?

Martin makes a strong case for why you should follow his strict rules. He
presents a convincing argument for why flexibility is king and why his
principles are _the_ way to achieve flexibility. The way it is presented, the
clean architecture is simply the natural end of consistently designing for
flexibility.

To summarize drastically, Martin's whole architecture relies on creating strict
architectural boundaries between software layers. That may sound daunting to
design but luckily his principles are almost mechanical in their application:
take any software problem and bounce around making design changes every time you
see a principle violated. When no violations remain, the result will always be
the clean architecture with strict architectural boundaries exactly where they
should be. Programmers love solving puzzles and Martin presents a beautiful one:
apply the principles to your own code base and reap the benefits!

This is the trap.

## The trap is sprung

By the time you are half-way through the book, Martin has completely laid out
the clean architecture and all of its principles. The rest of the book is
just examples and practical techniques. It is _incredibly_ tempting to get to work
re-architecting your codebase at this point. But just a couple chapters later he
drops a bombshell:

> The full-fledged architectural boundary uses reciprocal boundary interfaces to
> maintain isolation in both directions. Maintaining separation in both
> directions is expensive both in initial setup and in ongoing maintenance.

wat

This broke my brain. His whole pitch for flexibility is that it is less
expensive, but now he says if you follow all of his advice it will also be
expensive not just to switch to, but in the long term. To be clear, this expense
isn't isolated to a small part of your application, it _pervades_ it. The clean
architecture has at least _three_ of these architectural boundaries and they
span the entire application, meaning every single functional use case has to
cross all three.

He further clarifies that you probably don't want "full-fledged" boundaries
everywhere the principles dictate because in many cases the cost-benefit
tradeoff will be poor (because the flexibility isn't needed). This discussion
literally takes up four pages in the later half of his 400+ page book. And, in
my opinion, it completely dismantles his whole clean architecture. I feel like
he should rename it "The Expensive Flexibility-Centric Architecture" because
that more accurately captures the only situation where I can wholeheartedly
recommend it.

What is the point of an all-encompassing, principled architecture when it comes
with the asterisk "but only use this sometimes, when it's worth it"? Because
that immediately invites more questions:

* How do I determine if the flexibility is worth the cost of maintaining the
  architectural boundaries?
* When I weaken a boundary, which principles should be violated first and by
  how much?
* What architecture should I use when clean architecture isn't worth it?

Martin does not discuss any of these questions. Essentially the only answer he
gives is to claim that the clean architecture is always the ideal, so whenever
you must compromise your architecture you should do it in a way that you can get
back to the clean architecture if you need to. But again, if the fundamental
problem is that part of your application _isn't worth adapting_ to the clean
architecture, how exactly do you make the pitch that you should still architect
it with that end goal in mind?

## Re-architecting

The most compelling examples Martin gives are all blank slates. When you are
just starting out and you don't know what any of the concrete decisions will be
for your application, a highly flexible architecture makes sense. You can defer
low-level decisions while you focus on your core functionality. Most
importantly, as your application evolves you can identify areas where the
architectural boundaries aren't delivering value and weaken or remove them.
Martin even gives an example of this for his own FitNesse software.

Re-architecting is an entirely different beast and Martin even demonstrates it
with an example, though I think it ends up showing the opposite of what he
intends. The example is a taxi ordering app, similar to Uber. The app
finds drivers, lets you pick one, then dispatches the driver. He presents a simple
five component service-based architecture as a "bad" architecture. To
demonstrate its badness, the business then pivots to Uber Eats. Not only do we
dispatch drivers for taxi service, we also dispatch them for delivery of goods.
He questions:

> How many of those services will have to change to implement this feature? _All
> of them._

The solution he gives is a wonderful _13_ component service-based architecture.
I have no doubt that it would solve the problem with grace, but what if you
already have the five component architecture? How many of those components will
have to change, possibly drastically, in order to fit the new clean
architecture? _All of them_.

He also completely overlooks that the original "bad" architecture has an elegant
solution to the problem he presents. In between the service for finding drivers
and the service for selecting drivers, it provides a "candidate taxi" filter
service. If that filter were upgraded to understand what the purpose of the
order is (delivering goods versus providing a ride), you could reuse the entire
architecture as-is. It would require the filter component to change and possibly
one new communication component since now the filter is configurable for each
order.

Unfortunately I am in the position where I lead development of a huge,
established application and we are wondering if our architecture is the cause of
our high expenses. I have a good idea of which parts of our software need to be
flexible, and the answer definitely isn't "all of them". So I would feel naïve
if I were to advocate for clean architecture on its own when it sounds like even
Robert Martin would say that it either wouldn't solve all of our problems or
would simply shift our expenses around.

As I said at the beginning, many of Martin's principles are good, and I think we
would do better to apply them in areas where our application is currently
difficult to maintain. Unfortunately, simply accepting Martin's architectural
vision is insufficient to make it clear what the end goal looks like for us, nor
what the path to it should be.
