---
layout: post
title: "Gloomhaven is Not the Best Board Game"
date: 2022-01-09
categories: etc
---

My wife and I love playing board games, especially cooperative board games. So
we were very excited when an extremely generous friend of ours gifted us
Gloomhaven out of the blue. This created an interesting situation for a couple
reasons:

1. We were not at all part of the Kickstarter hype train surrounding the game. I
   had heard about it from a friend of ours and had seen a few favorable reviews
   online after it came out, so it looked okay, but we had no plan to ever buy it.
2. We do love co-op games, including a few heavy ones. And we **loved** Pandemic
   Legacy, so the idea of a new co-op campaign to play through together was
   appealing. In some sense we were its target audience!

What is interesting about this is that while we were excited to try the game and
were hoping to add it to our collection of beloved co-op games, we were under no
financial or psychological pressure to enjoy it. So what you are about to read
is, in some sense, an extremely unbiased review of the game.

## False Advertising

Here is the description of the game on Board Game Geek. I believe the publisher
has control of this, so this is a sort of official description

> Gloomhaven is a game of Euro-inspired tactical combat in a persistent world of
> shifting motives. Players will take on the role of a wandering adventurer with
> their own special set of skills and their own reasons for traveling to this
> dark corner of the world. Players must work together out of necessity to clear
> out menacing dungeons and forgotten ruins. In the process, they will... expand
> an ever-branching story fueled by the decisions they make.
>
> This is a game with a persistent and changing world that is ideally played
> over many game sessions. After a scenario, players will make decisions on what
> to do, which will determine how the story continues, kind of like a “Choose
> Your Own Adventure” book.

If you have played pen and paper RPGs before, like I have, you might come away
from that thinking that Gloomhaven is sort of like Dungeons & Dragons. Some of
the reviews I saw also gave me this impression, that in some sense it would be
D&D-light without a GM. Sounds pretty cool!

Unfortunately, in almost all of the ways that count, Gloomhaven is _nothing_
like Dungeons & Dragons. Here is the gameplay loop:

1. Draw a completely random city event in Gloomhaven. This could be anything
   from participating in an eating contest to quelling a riot. The event you get
   has no basis on your characters or your progress in the campaign's story. You
   get to make a binary decision as a group, the result of which is usually
   minor and short-lived.
2. Draw a completely random road event. Again this has no basis on your
   characters or your progress in the story. It doesn't matter if you're
   travelling to the distant mountains or right next door to the swamp; you draw
   a random road event. Same binary decision. Same limited consequences (often a
   buff/debuff for the upcoming scenario).
3. Choose a scenario to play from your available list. This is the biggest
   opportunity for role-playing since each scenario may help/hinder certain
   other factions in the world.
4. Play the scenario. Every single scenario we saw was essentially the same:
   "kill a bunch of enemies". It is a pure dungeon crawl. 99% of your play time
   will be spent on this step.
5. After the scenario you may get to level up and gain perks, then repeat. If
   you failed the scenario your only options are to retry it or select a
   different scenario, failure never impacts the campaign.

Before we dissect step 4, you'll notice that any kind of role-playing in the
game is extremely limited. Even the key role-playing that occurs in step 3 can
be problematic since it ultimately comes down to "choose one of the scenarios
from this list". Literally one of the first decisions you will be presented with
is this:

* Keep killing the necromancer cultists you have been fighting the whole time,
* Help(???) the necromancer cultists you have been fighting the whole time, or
* Raid a village of oppressed natives (as a bonus you get to see their crying
  children after you murder the adults!)

The latter two are so insane that I had to re-read the story several times since
I couldn't believe that those were the scenario choices available to us. By this
point our group was so sick of the necromancers that we chose the
native-slaughter scenario just to experience something different. It was almost
more annoying that the result of that scenario was actually interesting! A
result we never would have seen if we had actually been trying to role-play.

Aside from immediate story impacts, occasionally decisions you make can have
long-term impacts, but even they are limited to adding some condition that maybe
some future event will check for. For example, completing a scenario may grant
the "Dark Bounty" party achievement. As-is, this does absolutely nothing and is
essentially meaningless to the players. The most interesting thing that could
happen is some future event could say "Requirement: Dark Bounty" and you get to
do something, but no one in our group found this particularly compelling or
exciting. Other long-term impacts shuffle cards into the city and road event
decks, but since these decks are very large and random, those effects are
similarly unexciting.

This isn't just me. Several other friends of mine also familiar with pen and
paper RPGs separately tried Gloomhaven and were similarly disappointed because
of the impression that it would be more of a role playing game. So if you love
real RPGs, or were thinking of trying out Gloomhaven as a gateway to RPGs, I can
only recommend passing on it.

So let's put the role-playing aside. Let's say you want Gloomhaven only for the
gameplay. The main problem then is that the core of that gameplay loop, playing
scenarios, isn't that great. There is interesting stuff outside of that step but
_all_ of that is gated on scenarios. You had better _love_ the scenarios if you
want to play Gloomhaven.

## Playing Scenarios

The gameplay hook of Gloomhaven, playing two cards and getting half of each, is
pretty interesting. I like that it allows for some limited planning with limited
information, followed by additional decision-making once you see how the
initiative shakes out and what the enemies are doing. It also works pretty well
with the discard/lose mechanic of figuring out the tempo of the scenario for
your character and deciding when to short/long rest. These mechanics are not
without flaws, however.

Once you have selected your cards, realistically you don't have much of a
choice. Enemy behavior can be extremely unpredictable, often deciding whether or
not they will be in range, whether or not you will be able to deal a killing
blow, or whether or not you will be able to react to their action. Consequently,
often your decision will be "Do this AMAZING thing you planned for or this
totally crappy thing you never wanted to do" (because your plan worked out) or
"Do either crappy thing you didn't plan for" (because something unexpected
happened). So the main impact of the mechanic is actually _before_ you select
your cards, when it restricts your options. This does make for interesting deck
building decisions, since it's cool to get a card with an attack on the bottom
or a move on the top, but that's about the extent of the mechanic's impact.

Similarly the resting mechanic practically offers very few choices. All of our
characters had enough good cards that there was rarely ever a desire to rest
early to recover a particular card. Usually you just want to rest at the last
minute to avoid losing cards early. There is some interesting decision making in
terms of timing when certain cards are discarded or lost, but we found there
wasn't enough variety in the scenarios to demand a lot of improvisation in that
department. After a couple scenarios we had all found a working rhythm and there
was little incentive to stray from it.

Another unique Gloomhaven idea, the attack deck, does not work out as well as
you might expect. Getting to modify your attack deck throughout the campaign is
a very cool idea. But the problem remains that scenarios generally only last
around 10 rounds, and you usually get at most one attack per round so drawing
from that deck is _extremely_ impactful. Two players had several turns ruined by
drawing a miss that completely negated what would have been a massive attack.
It's especially grating that drawing a miss causes you to reshuffle your deck,
so while most good attack draws cause the remainder of your deck to become
statistically weaker, the probability of drawing the worst card in your deck can
only ever _increase_. On the flip side one of our players buffed their attack
deck for two different scenarios and never saw a single benefit; the deck is so
big that it isn't very unlikely to leave a bunch of cards buried for the whole
scenario, making buffs less exciting than you might hope.

It does generally average out, and it doesn't feel unfair since enemies are
subject to the same rules, but it certainly doesn't feel _fun_. Rather than
rewarding you for executing a clever plan, the attack deck injects a massive
dose of chaos, making plans seem pointless.

I don't even want to get into how tedious it is to strategize around the enemy
AI. In most co-op games I've played the enemy AI is a bit random but also
generally predictable, because it's fun to plan around a semi-predictable enemy.
As I said before, enemies are incredibly unpredictable in Gloomhaven. Sometimes
they'll walk in circles or they'll decide not to attack when you're at your most
vulnerable. Other times they'll expertly counter your turn, healing right before
you can get the kill or refusing to move when you were hoping they would close
and attack you. The AI decks seem too deliberately random; the intention seems
to be to prevent players from planning around them which, to me, seems like
consciously removing a potential source of fun from the game. Childres wants
each enemy to be able to do 8 different kinds of attacks so that's what you get,
even if the result is so chaotic that it doesn't feel satisfying to play
against.

Exacerbating everything is the fact that character progression is also very
slow. Expect to play at least 3 or 4 scenarios before getting a single new card
or perk. So not only do most scenarios play nearly identically, your characters
will probably also be nearly identical from game to game.

And underneath all of this, the game effects you are carrying out never become
very interesting. Most effects are just move or attack or add some status
modifier which buffs/debuffs moving or attacking. The most exciting a turn got
for us was "I did a lot of damage!" Plus there's plenty of counting and
re-counting hexes, double checking rules, or simply re-evaluating your turn
because there's so much to keep track of; all of which slow the pace of the game
to a crawl. Ironically this is where Gloomhaven reminds me most of D&D (at its
worst), with its exciting yet tedious, repetitious, meticulous combat.

## Design

I would be remiss to not dig in deeper to that tedium because Gloomhaven's
design enforces it at every opportunity. In a word, Gloomhaven's design is best
summarized as "uncompromising". It is uncompromising in the sense that it seems
Childres developed a clear vision of what mechanics would be in the game, and
then designed the game to include those mechanics with little to no
consideration of how they would actually play out as a board game.

Setting up a scenario in Gloomhaven can be most charitably described as
mind-numbing. You get to sift through dozens of nearly identical map pieces, hex
tiles (double-sided!), trap tiles, monster standees, etc. all because Childres
wants you to be able to hit a bandit archer with your dagger in a spooky crypt
with a wooden barrel in the corner, goddammit! No, you can't use a pillar hex to
represent the barrel even though they are functionally identical! No, you can't
use the city archer standee, because it doesn't have a bandit doing the [booty
pose][1] on it! Okay, maybe there's a scenario with both city archers and bandit
archers so we need separate ones. Maybe there's a scenario with both pillars and
barrels. But this is what I mean by uncompromising. A sane designer would
simplify these elements to spare some of the sanity of the players.

[1]: https://kevinbolk.tumblr.com/post/13332046686/as-promised-heres-the-avengers-parody-namely-of

Oh, and if you are playing as intended, you're only supposed to set up one room
at a time, which means in the middle of someone's move action when a door is
opened you get to pause the entire game while you go digging for more of
everything to set up the new room. Conceptually this makes sense since you don't
know what is in the new room until you open the door. But practically it doesn't
work at all, because unless you're setting up the scenario solo with your other
players elsewhere, they are probably going to catch a glimpse of what is in that
room while you're setting up other parts of the scenario. So that whole mechanic
is on the honor system anyway. Why bother? Why not make the whole scenario
public information? The only thing it would change is being able to better plan
ahead, but you can already perfectly plan ahead as-is (with more tedium) because
you can replay a scenario infinitely many times until you win and the setup is
always identical. Childres wants the contents of the room to be hidden, no
compromise.

I don't have anything against long setup times on principle, but they need to
have a payoff. I don't mind spending a half hour setting up Eldritch Horror,
Aeon's End, or Spirit Island because I know that work will pay off in the later
gameplay. How many times has it mattered in Gloomhaven that I was in a 4&times;5 room
instead of a 4&times;6 one? Does it matter what the obstacle or the trap or the
standee looks like? No, and I resent the amount of wasted time and painful box
organization it imposes on me when I'm trying to enjoy a board game with my
friends.

Are there ways to improve setup? Yes, but if your game has multiple
community-made setup guides and apps, I'd say that's pretty good evidence of
kludgey, uncompromising game design.

## Legacy

Maybe you somehow don't care about any of that and you still find Gloomhaven
appealing just because it's a legacy game. You love opening boxes, putting
stickers on things, destroying components, and drawing on things. Even then I
cannot recommend it. After playing for several hours I have yet to see a single
compelling legacy mechanic.

The main strength of a legacy system is that it allows you to expand the game in
completely unexpected ways. The boundaries of the game are not set! New rules
can be added, new game pieces can be revealed with unheard of effects! What
excitement! If Gloomhaven has such legacy effects it is extremely coy with them
because it has given no hint that such things can occur. What legacy effects I
know of so far are at best _technically_ legacy. For example,

* All the stickers I have seen for the board are more like unlocks. They could
  be just as easily tracked by writing them as a list on a piece of paper. I
  have no idea what purpose the board serves because other identical effects
  (Party Achievements, Reputation) _are_ tracked on a piece of paper.
* Similarly every component you write on with a pen could have been easily
  tracked on paper.
* The only component destruction we have seen so far is the random event cards
  after you finish playing them, which is a blessing since it at least
  guarantees some variety. But the destruction has no emotional impact because
  you aren't losing access to a game component or anything like that.
* Cards can be given permanent upgrades with stickers. This is a solid legacy
  mechanic but I have yet to see how/when I will be allowed to do it. Plus all
  of the effects are familiar; they utilize all of the mechanics known up front
  so none of them are particularly exciting. "Your attack does +1 damage" is
  about as tame a legacy mechanic as I can think of.

The main legacy mechanic seems to be the aforementioned achievement system.
Technically this is flexible enough that there could be crazy shit just ahead
that says "If you have achievements X, Y, and Z, open boxes P, Q, and R and
assemble the mechazord" but again _I have seen no evidence of mechanics like
this_ after playing for hours. If Gloomhaven has such tricks up its sleeve then
I can only say that the legacy mechanic is badly introduced. You need to give
people a taste early on of what is possible, otherwise they, like me, may lose
interest completely!

## Verdict

This has clearly been an very negative review yet I don't want to conclude with
the impression that Gloomhaven is a "bad" game. I started by saying "not the
best", after all. If someone had already set up a game of Gloomhaven for me, I
would happily sit down and play every now and then. If someone had introduced
Gloomhaven to me as a sort of slow-mo, puzzley, grindy _action_ RPG, perhaps I
would not have been so disappointed. For everything that Gloomhaven actually is
(ignoring what it says it is) it's... good. In fact it's better than many other
dungeon crawlers I've played. But it's certainly not the best board game. Why?
Simply because at everything it does, I can think of other games which do it
significantly better.

If you want something in the same genre as Gloomhaven, I recommend Kingdom
Death: Monster. Lots of figurines, actually surprising legacy mechanics,
compelling role-playing opportunities, dense and varied combat. It's much more
punishing, but this can be easily house-ruled if you prefer a more forgiving
game. KD:M shares some of Gloomhaven's shortcomings, but does enough things
better that I think it comes out ahead.

If you want something with similar card mechanics to Gloomhaven but a better
co-op puzzle to solve, I recommend Spirit Island. It has similar deck building,
agonizing over timing, when to discard, when to lose a card, similar need for
improvisation where you choose cards first and later decide what they actually
do. No legacy mechanics, but the core gameplay is _so_ satisfying.

If you like the chaotic randomness of Gloomhaven where surprising things happen
and you kinda plan stuff out, cross your fingers, and hope for the best, I
recommend Eldritch Horror. It's not legacy, but the sheer volume of expansion
content means that even after hundreds of hours of play you will still stumble
on things you haven't seen before and the wild swings of tragedy-to-triumph are
unparalleled.

If you want a co-op legacy experience like Gloomhaven where you and your friends
bond together over a shared story, I recommend Pandemic Legacy. Seasons 1, 2,
and 0 all have unforgettable moments that really demonstrate the strength of a
legacy board game.

I realize I'm going against the grain here, what with Gloomhaven being #1 on
BGG, but I do feel the need to provide this counterargument since it can make me
feel a bit crazy to be such a big board game enthusiast and yet to disagree so
strongly with the community on this topic. From what I've seen of others'
reviews, I think perhaps the disconnect with me is that if there is intricacy in
a board game, I expect that to be something that I as a player should interact
with a lot. Everything I'm not supposed to interact with should be simplified
and streamlined to allow me to better focus on the core of the game. Childres's
design philosophy seems almost to be the opposite of that: the core of the game
is relatively simple, and players are forced to interact with a lot of intricacy
as the barrier for entry.
