---
layout: post
title: "Gradle still sucks"
date: 2023-01-06
categories: etc
---

I wrote a blog post a while ago [complaining about Gradle][complain], mostly
from a position of ignorance: I had never really taken the time to properly
learn the tool and I was frustrated while trying to stumble my way through
working with it. But luckily, my company encourages learning and experimentation
so I was given an entire week--40 whole working hours--to do nothing but learn
Gradle. So I did. And I still hate it, but for different reasons.

[complain]: {% post_url 2022-02-16-gradle %}

## How to learn Gradle

During my period of intense frustration with Gradle I found this [condescending
blog post][asshole] claiming that anyone who dislikes it is simply using it
wrong. So when I finally got the opportunity to learn it, I was adamant that I
would learn it the "right way". No outdated tutorials, no hacks, no workarounds.
I wanted to learn only the modern, idiomatic, as-God-intended method of Gradle
usage.

[asshole]: https://melix.github.io/blog/2021/01/the-problem-with-gradle.html

To be fair, this is always the best way to learn any tool. Always be wary of
learning something through only practical examples, how-to guides, or
copy-pasted code. Because us programmers are universally terrible at everything
we do, and if you learn that way you will invariably end up learning someone
else's bad practices. It is always better to go back to first principles; find
resources that zoom out and tell you what the tool is for, how it is generally
intended to be used, and the overall design patterns used with it. Ideally only
trust sources very closely associated with the development of the tool itself
since second- and third-hand sources can accidentally introduce their own
baggage.

Having learned idiomatic Gradle, I can say that almost none of the resources out
in the wild are good. The good list is extremely short:

* [Understanding Gradle][ug] is a great video series walking through most of the
  basic pieces of gradle and what they are for. It doesn't have enough detail to
  teach you how to get a fully idiomatic build, but at least it gives you a
  sense of what kind of stuff you should be doing.
* The official docs on [structuring large projects][large] presents similar
  information in a text form. I object to the word "large" in the title since it
  makes it sound exceptional in some way, as if most gradle projects won't
  benefit from this approach. I think a more accurate title would be
  "structuring nontrivial projects". If you're doing some toy project in gradle,
  sure you don't need this. But likely any serious project should be aware of
  these practices.
* The [idiomatic Gradle][id] repo is a complex project applying all of the best
  practices. Not super useful when you're first learning because it will look
  like alien hieroglyphs, but once you start to grok Gradle, it provides lots of
  interesting examples to consider.

[ug]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLWQK2ZdV4Yl2k2OmC_gsjDpdIBTN0qqkE
[large]: https://docs.gradle.org/release-nightly/userguide/structuring_software_products.html
[id]: https://github.com/jjohannes/idiomatic-gradle

Probably the most surprising discovery for me was just how useless most of the
official Gradle docs are. Many of them are outdated, incomplete, or so
specialized that they're useless for general learning.

## What is Gradle?

I won't try to fully explain Gradle, that's what the links above are for. But I
can tell you the one reason you are probably failing to understand Gradle. First
off, pretty much all of the [common reasons][eckel] given online are wrong.
Well, not exactly wrong, but rather they are misleadingly simple.

[eckel]: https://www.bruceeckel.com/2021/01/02/the-problem-with-gradle/

Here is why you actually don't get it: Gradle is _not_ a build tool, rather it
is **a platform for building build tools**. As soon as you stop seeing it as a
simple means of hooking together tasks and dependencies you'll start seeing why
it is so complex.

## Why does it suck?

I love this quote by Peter Bhat Harkins:

> One of the most irritating things programmers do regularly is feel so good
> about learning a hard thing that they don’t look for ways to make it easy, or
> even oppose things that would do so.

I almost fell for this trap. Once I started actually solving problems with
Gradle I noticed that I started talking about its complexities in a more
positive light. But that's stupid. When I took a step back I realized that all
of the problems I had with Gradle before still existed, I just understood how to
use them to get work done. But the fundamental problem with Gradle is that it
simply does not justify these complexities.

### A case study

To learn Gradle, I set myself a task of incorporating some custom code
generation into our build process. This is the kind of thing I can easily do
with shell scripting, but I wanted it to be a proper part of Gradle since it
perfectly fits the traditional build-tool model of monitoring when an input
file changes to determine when to run a task that generates an output file.

At a high level, the process is this:

1. Run some command line stuff to prepare the code generation tools
2. Run a script on some input files to produce intermediate metadata needed for
   code generation
3. Run a script on the intermediate metadata to produce the code
4. Compile the code normally

The goal is that I can run a single build task and it checks if either the
original input files or metadata have changed and reruns whatever parts of the
process are needed before building my code.

Could I have accomplished this just by opening up `build.gradle` and writing a
bunch of custom tasks? Absolutely. But doing it that way would be like writing
your entire program logic inside of `main`: technically feasible, but not
idiomatic.

So here is what I had to do in order to do it the right way:

1. Since the part of the project relating to input files and metadata is
   logically separate from the rest of our app, split it into a Gradle
   subproject to follow best practices
2. Now that we have separate projects, best practice dictates that each has its
   own "convention plugin" to distinguish the type of build it is performing, so
   define a sub-build for storing custom plugins
3. Develop a custom plugin for the metadata generation. This involved going down
   a huge rabbit hole of trying to use an open source community plugin since
   technically some of the code generation stuff I was using could be run on the
   JVM and thus could be built into gradle
4. Find out that the community plugin had a critical bug in one of my required
   use-cases so I had to throw it out and start over. Develop a complete custom
   Gradle plugin for running the command line steps I had been doing manually
   before
5. Best practice is to define custom task types in your convention plugin rather
   than customizing built-in tasks, so subclass gradle's Exec task to specify
   the kind of inputs and outputs needed for each command
6. Work around the fact that Gradle's built-in Exec task doesn't work on Windows
7. Best practice is to not tightly couple your build script to your plugin's
   tasks, so develop a mini DSL extension so that the tasks can change
   independently of the build script
8. Now that the convention plugin is so complex, write end-to-end tests that
   create mini gradle builds that apply the plugin and verify that the task
   output is correct
9. Write another convention plugin for turning the metadata into source code
10. Break your brain trying to figure out how to apply Kotlin plugins to your
    convention plugin while applying different versions of the same plugins to
    your actual app build since Gradle bundles its own internal version of
    Kotlin which is older than the one for your app
11. Create the code generation task. This is actually the easiest part since you
    can pretty much write normal code with normal tests, though you still need
    to figure out the right input/output types for the task since the best
    practice is that all such types in Gradle are redirected through "provider"
    types instead of being used directly
12. Write another mini DSL extension for customizing the code generation task
13. Figure out how to add generated code to a source set via the Kotlin Gradle
    plugin. Duh, it's obviously

        kotlin {
          sourceSets {
            val commonMain by getting {
              kotlin {
                srcDir(...)
              }
            }
          }
        }

14. Finally start setting up the actual Gradle builds. Apply the first
    convention plugin and configure the custom metadata-producing tasks. Easy.
    Wait. Shit. How do you get the output of the subproject task to be visible
    to the other project so that Gradle understands the task dependency between
    the two projects?
15. Define a "consumable configuration" in the subproject and add the task
    output to it by declaring an "artifact". Oops now your build script is
    tightly coupled to the plugin task. This seems unidiomatic and unavoidable.
16. Remember to use `flatMap` on the task to get its output because task
    creation is lazy!
17. Apply the other convention plugin where code generation is needed. Configure
    the code generation task to get... wait, how do I get the artifact that I
    declared in the subproject?
18. Define a "resolvable configuration" here. Declare a dependency which points
    the resolvable configuration at the consumable configuration from the
    subproject
19. Wonder what the hell a configuration is and why I'm declaring them. Check
    the docs:

    > A configuration is a named set of dependencies grouped together for a
    > specific goal.

    Yep that clarifies nothing
20. Hook up the resolvable configuration to the code generation task. Wait, it
    needs a file, not a configuration. Arbitrarily grab the first file from the
    configuration (since we know the subproject only added one file). That feels
    shitty
21. Remember to use `map` on the configuration since it's lazy!

And, believe it or not, it's as simple as that.

### tl;dr

What sucks about the above process is not that it's long. It's the sheer number
of concepts that must be learned and interacted with: subbuilds, subprojects,
plugins, tasks, providers, extensions, source sets, configurations, artifacts,
dependencies, _and_ all of the quirks and workarounds involved with each of
those things.

All of this complexity makes working with Gradle a slog. You can fully, deeply
understand every single aspect of your build until you want to do one thing
slightly differently and suddenly it doesn't work because you were supposed to
be using some totally different part of Gradle you never heard about before.

The whole idea of using community-developed plugins becomes a minefield because
the chance of them applying all of the concepts completely correctly is
essentially 0%, meaning you might be okay as long as you're only doing basic
stuff, but as soon as you stray off the beaten path stuff starts breaking and
you have almost no chance to fix it properly yourself.

The complexity does come with some small benefits. It's cool that our custom
Gradle plugins have their own tests so we can independently test our code
generation process without touching any of our actual app code. Once you
understand how Gradle likes to structure things, it does make your build scripts
less cluttered and each bit of build logic ends up compartmentalized in a
sensible place.

But goddam it feels like there must be an easier way to accomplish this stuff.
I've learned dozens of different tools over my software development career and
compared to them the amount of comfort I feel with Gradle after 40 hours of
dedicated study is atrociously low. I have since gone on to further enhance our
Gradle build process and it honestly hasn't felt any easier. The only difference
from before is that when working on Gradle stuff I used to spend way more time
than I expected, get incredibly frustrated, and give up; now I spend way more
time than I expected, get incredibly frustrated, and eventually (somehow) find a
fix.
